Previously,
I mentioned that the auth in OAuth2 stands for
authorization and not authentication,
but user authentication seems to be one of OAuth2's most popular use cases.
Now, to unpack this, let's take a look at OAuth2's intended use case.
How can Victoria authorize Crypto Portfolio to access her Facebook
personal data on her behalf such as her email,
name, friends list,
or post to her war without giving Crypto Portfolio her Facebook password?
Now, to understand how OAuth2 achieves this,
you need to first understand the actors and entities in OAuth2,
so let's start with Victoria's personal data.
This is known as the protected resource,
which then makes Victoria the resource owner.
The protected resource needs to be hosted and secured somewhere.
That somewhere is known as the resource server.
In our demo application, that's a service provided by Facebook.
Now Crypto Portfolio is the client,
which wants to access Victoria's protected resources.
The resource server will only give access to Crypto
Portfolio if it has a valid access token,
which is issued by an authorization server; however,
before the authorization server issues and access token,
it first needs to authenticate both the client and the resource owner.
Client can authenticate with its client ID and secret,
and Victoria would simply log into her Facebook account,
generally,
using her username and password or any other
authentication mechanisms supported by Facebook.
Now, once the auth server confirms her identity,
then it will ask her to consent if she actually authorizes Crypto
Portfolio to access her personal data on her behalf,
only then it will issue an access token to the client,
which can then present that token to the resource server to
get access to the protected resources.
Now,
the rules of how these actors interact between each other to
achieve this is known as a flow in OAuth,
and the most common flow is the Authorization Code Grant; however,
in regards to authentication,
the spec only states that the auth server needs to authenticate
the resource owner before getting her consent,
and also, the client using the client ID and secret,
but nothing about client authenticating the user.
Generally, though,
the user would first register and authenticate with the client, in this case,
the Crypto Portfolio application,
and only then it might be prompted to share her
Facebook data with the application.
Now, some developers then realized, hey,
since Facebook turns a valid Auth token,
then Victoria must be who she claims to be as Facebook's auth
server is required to authenticate her, hence we can assume that it's her,
and we can skip authenticating her ourselves and just
simply outsource that to Facebook.
Great!
However, the access token is a Bearer token,
meaning anyone in possession of it can access Victoria's data on her behalf.
Tokens are also electronic and can be easily copied
and shared with other services,
so there's no guarantee that the bearer of the token is actually Victoria.
Another site Victoria might use could also be a client of Facebook's.
Now if that application also convinces Victoria to share her Facebook
data and ends up with a valid Facebook access token,
then it could present that to Crypto Portfolio and impersonate Victoria,
gaining access to her portfolio,
hence most providers build functionality on top of OAuth2
to provide sign‑in functionality for their clients to
address such cases and issues,
hence OAuth2 login is generally an in‑house extension of the OAuth2 spec.
Now, behind the scenes,
Spring Security is hiding a lot of this complexity for us; however,
it's still important to understand how the Authorization Code Grant flow
works as it will make your life so much easier when you need to make
adjustments or debug any issues, and the best way to understand this flow is to see it in action. So let's do that, next.